Compared to genetic studies EWAS provides a unique opportunity to study dynamic response to treatment. It has been suggested that DNA methylation is associated with drug resistance. To validate our suite we have performed analysis of differentially-methylated regions using publicly available data from the Infinium Human Methylation BeadChip array of melanoma biopsies pre and post MAPKi treatment, obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (GSE65183). Methylation profiling by genome tiling array in melanoma can help us understand how non-genomic and immune changes can have an impact on treatment efficiency and disease progression. Raw image IDAT files were loaded into the Galaxy environment using Data Libraries. EWAS workflow was run on Red and Green dataset collections of patient-matched melanoma tumours biopsied before therapy and during disease progression. The IDAT files, pre-defined phenotype tables and up-to-date genome tables (UCSC Main on Human hg19 Methyl450) were used as inputs. In order to detect poorly performing samples we ran quality diagnostics. Differentially-methylated loci were identified using single probe analysis implemented by our tool with the following parameters: phenotype set as  categorical and qCutoff size set to 0.05. The bump hunting algorithm was applied to identify  DMRs with maximum location gap parameter set to 250, genomic profile above the cutoff equal to 0.1, number of resamples set to 0, null method set to permutation and verbose equal FALSE which means that no additional progress information will be printed. Differentially-Methylated Regions and Positions revealed the need for further investigation of tissue diversity in response to environmental changes.
